---
layout: post
title: "The Quest To Create Drawn .NET MAUI Apps"
date: 2024-07-15 12:00:00 +0000
categories: [MAUI, DrawnUI]
tags: [drawnui, skiasharp, dotnetmaui]    
description: .NET MAUI app completely drawn on a Skia canvas and its rendering engine.
image: /assets/img/ceojuly.jpg
---

## Drawing Context

Today cross-platform apps can successfully be drawn on a canvas.  
.NET MAUI, previously Xamarin, team had put efforts into creating drawn controls with Material Design library and offer tools for creating such controls with Maui.Graphics.  
Recall what Adam Pedley and other enthusiasts have done in an attempt [to make Xamarin drawn](https://github.com/adamped/xamarin.flutter). A lot of developers and companies have created their MAUI drawn controls ever since.  

Recently [a .NET 8 MAUI app](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.niroapps.insects) totally drawn on a single hardware-accelerated Skia canvas went to GooglePlay and we will explore some details behind its creation.

## SkiaSharp

SkiaSharp 😍 is a fully cross-platform, rich 2D graphics drawing API powered by Google’s Skia library, the one used by Web browsers and Android OS. [SkisSharp](https://github.com/mono/SkiaSharp) was created by Matthew Leibowitz who is still working on it every day, and a new version 3 is expected by the end of the year.   

Years ago this awesome library solved a case when I was working on a Xamarin app: different heavy cell templates were switching inside a CollectionView, the designer asked for shadows around them, and the scrolling ended up being very laggy. After each cell content was replaced with a SkiaSharp canvas scrolling went much smoother, with shadows and complex layouts. The need of different templates was removed, SkiaSharp was drawing different layouts inside same canvases.   

That led to a logical thought: what if we could replace the whole CollectionView with a drawn control? And what if the whole app was drawn?.. 


## A Completely Drawn .NET MAUI App

One day after evaluating a new Figma design I started a challenge to make this app totally drawn with SkiaSharp.  
The root view would be a SkiaSharp canvas and all the navigation would happen on it: modals, popups, camera preview and all the rest would be drawn on same canvas.  

This is still an experiment for a commercial app but worked well enough for this one. The final result is somewhat interesting.

<div class="video-container">
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/5QIaM0xsLbA?si=SBc_Jmpwl3asFieT" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>


**Bug ID: Insect Identifier AI** .NET MAUI Android app [in GooglePlay](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.niroapps.insects)

This is a .NET 8 MAUI Android app for a real-time AI identification of insects. 

- Custom camera control displays and sends frames to a TensorFlow ML model
- TensorFlow analyzes images on the device in real time
- Custom bindings for TensorFlow Light to be able to use GPU
- Custom bindings and native wrapper for Adapty in-app purchases and library
- Custom bindings and native wrapper for AppsFlyer analytics library
- Custom Android bindings for Amplitude tracking library
- Firebase Analytics and Crashlitycs
- Local SQLite database with Entity-Framework code-first migrations
- Available in different languages

Some native views were placed seamlessly on top of the canvas: web pages for “Privacy” and “Terms Of Use” and a customized MAUI Entry for input. Those are wrapped inside `SkiaMauiElement` which can take a snapshot of a native view to draw and animate it over the canvas.  

A lot of interesting problems were solved while making the app. 
For example, the page with insect details first renders a short info then loads a full one from API and has to appear to re-render while scrolling. 
Moreover, there is an unknown number of wiki articles defined by a `DataTemplate` in XAML, that must then be instantiated without the UI freezing while constructing. Then they load optional banner images from the Web, all of this happening while scrolling.  

An `ImageDoubleBuffered` cache type was then born: to render the last prepared cache while constructing a new one in the background. Instead of the usual `ListView` or `CollectionView` we have this:

```xml
<draw:SkiaScroll HorizontalOptions="Fill">
    <draw:SkiaLayout Type="Column HorizontalOptions="Fill">
    <draw:SkiaLayout.DataTemplate>
        whatever, cache is `ImageDoubleBuffered` type
    </draw:SkiaLayout.DataTemplate>
    </draw:SkiaLayout>
</draw:SkiaScroll>
```

`SkiaLayout` implements `ILayoutInsideViewport` to be notified by the parent scroll of the rendering area. This way it can virtualize the rendering and recycle its cells defined by the data template.
`SkiaShell` navigates inside the `Canvas` view like MAUI `Shell` does for native root view; we have total control over rendering and releasing memory for views. This drawn shell can bring new views, modals, and popups, freeze the background behind, and apply customizable effects to it (blur and dim in this case).

Around 90% of the app UI was defined in XAML 😅. 


## The Rendering Engine

The tools used to make this app formed a stand-alone open-source library, [DrawnUI for .NET MAUI](https://github.com/taublast/DrawnUi.Maui), consumable as a nuget or a source code dependency.

### Features

* Draw UI using SkiaSharp with hardware acceleration
* Easily create your controls and animations
* Design in XAML or C#
* Create for Android, iOS, MacCatalyst, Windows
* Use MAUI Hotreload
* 2D and 3D Transforms
* Animations, easy to customize
* Visual Effects, filters, shaders etc
* Gestures support for down, up, taps, longpressing, panning, scrolling, zooming, rotating
* Caching system for operations and images
* Optimized for performance, rendering only visible elements, recycling templates etc
* Navigate on canvas using MAUI familiar `Shell` techniques
* Prebuilt UI elements for layouts, scrolling, rich text rendering etc.
* Can reuse your SkiaSharp and Maui.Graphics existing code
* Extendable with additional packages, already includes MauiGraphics, MapsUi etc.

The library is best used for these cases:

1. To create pixel-perfect custom-drawn controls
2. To identify and replace app laggy UI parts to replace with faster-drawn alternatives
3. To create totally drawn apps

<div class="video-container-github">
<video controls muted autoplay playsinline>
  <source src="https://github.com/taublast/DrawnUi.Maui/assets/25801194/3b360229-ce3b-4d33-a85b-554d1cca8408" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>
</div>

Prebuilt elements are `SkiaControl`, `SkiaLayout`, `SkiaShape`, `SkiaLabel`, `SkiaImage`, `SkiaSvg` and many others, easily subclassable via virtual methods, with no private API. The main idea behind is to make the toolset reusable and customizable at will. Controls have usual MAUI `VisualElement` properties like `BackgroundColor`, `HorizontalOptions` and so on, along with many supplementary additions.  

There are some key differences with MAUI though, one being that `HorizontalOptions` and `VerticalOptions` are not `Fill` by default; if you just write a `<SkiaLayout/>` it will not display, because it has `Start` layout options (not `Fill`), empty content, and no size requests.

Toolkit drawn controls built on top of the basic ones include `SkiaDrawer`, `SkiaCarousel`,`SkiaGif`, and many more. And `SkiaShell` makes possible the creation of totally drawn apps.

Accessibility can be totally compatible and is on the roadmap.

Documentation is still very much in the ToDo 😔 state; while many examples are already here, more about them below.

### Quick Start

Install the nuget package __AppoMobi.Maui.DrawnUi__ , using the latest *stable* version.

Initialize the library inside your `MauiProgram.cs` file:

```csharp
builder.UseDrawnUi();
```

Anywhere in your existing MAUI app you can include a `Canvas` and start drawing your UI. The `Canvas` control is aware of its children's size and will resize accordingly.

At the same time, you could set a fixed size for the `Canvas` and its children will adapt to it. When opting for max fps do not make it adapt to content size, use `Fill` or `Height/WidthRequest`.

Import the namespace:
```xml  
  xmlns:draw="http://schemas.appomobi.com/drawnUi/2023/draw"
```
Consume:

 
```xml  
<draw:Canvas>
    <draw:SkiaLayout HorizonatlOptions="Fill" Type="Column">

    <draw:SkiaShape 
        HorizontalOptions="Center"
        WidthRequest="90" LockRatio="1" Type="Circle">
    
        <SkiaImage Source="https://api.skia.org/logo.png"/>
    
    </draw:SkiaShape>

	<SkiaButton 
            Text="Hello" 
            HorizontalOptions="Center"
            TextColor="White"
            TintColor="Black"
            CornerRadius="8"/>

    </draw:SkiaLayout>
</draw:Canvas>
```
 

## Creating Custom-Drawn Controls 

With DrawnUI the process is much easier than creating controls directly using low-level SkiaSharp primitives. We already have Lego-like bricks you to assemble from, compositing controls like you would with MAUI `Frame`, `Border`, etc.

It's obviously much easier to maintain and fix issues for a single drawn control than for all platform-dependent implementations.  

The process of creating a custom control is out of the scope of this article; I could touch it later if this finds enough interest. It would be created like a usual MAUI control, the main difference being using DrawnUI elements instead of MAUI controls.

Many examples are inside the [Sandbox](https://github.com/taublast/DrawnUi.Maui/tree/main/src/samples/Sandbox) project as well as in the [demo apps](https://github.com/taublast).

Here is an example of “partly-drawn” .NET 8 MAUI created with DrawnUI published app full of drawn custom controls; canvases are everywhere inside standard pages. But all the scrolls, recycled cells collections, maps, buttons, labels, and other controls are drawn. The main difference with the "totally drawn insects app" is that here we have many canvases all around the app.

### Racebox

Android + iOS + Windows app for measuring vehicle performance in real-time in pair with external hardware BLE measurement Racebox device.

<div class="video-container">
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/JQkJhXR9IMY?si=Iqrkp503HAtF9bDg" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

[iOS](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/racebox-vehicle-dynamics/id6444165250)  
[GooglePlay](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.raceboxcompanion.app)  

* Tinted online maps for vehicle paths
* Drawn controls everywhere including scrollable recysled cells
* Custom SDK for Racebox BLE protocol communication
* Using third-party API for Weather retrieval at local GPS coordinates
* Local SQLite database with Entity-Framework code-first migrations

### Examples With Source Code

There are a lot of drawn controls inside the [Sandbox](https://github.com/taublast/DrawnUi.Maui/tree/main/src/samples/Sandbox) project inside the DrawnUI repository:

<div class="video-container-github">
<video controls muted autoplay playsinline>
  <source src="../../assets/vids/sandbox.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>
</div>

## Replacing Native UI With Drawn

What’s better than another example:

[App example with source code](https://github.com/taublast/SurfAppCompareDrawn)

Here we have recycled drawn cells with shadows scrolling smoothly, as compared to standard MAUI controls, which put more pressure on the device.

<div class="video-container-github">
<video controls muted autoplay playsinline>
  <source src="https://github.com/taublast/SurfAppCompareDrawn/assets/25801194/3fa08b5c-746a-4720-b2ac-b5f0c5af4799" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>
</div>

The replacement process is rather intuitive; you need a top container as `Canvas`, then basically you can replace standard MAUI controls with drawn, like replacing `Grid` with `SkiaLayout Type="Grid"`, `VerticalStackLayout` with `SkiaLayout Type="Column"`, `ScrollView` with `SkiaScroll` and so on.

This could very useful for existing MAUI libraries that use composited custom controls, for example, a month calendar view with tons of native views/handlers for days, arrows, grids etc, could be replaced with just one `Canvas` native view; everything else would become virtual.

## Creating Completely Drawn Apps

Besides the already demonstrated published Insects app there are some other examples with source code of completely drawn apps with `Canvas` a root view:

### [SpaceShooter Game](https://github.com/taublast/AppoMobi.Maui.DrawnUi.SpaceShooter)

<div class="video-container-github">
<video controls muted autoplay playsinline>
  <source src="https://github.com/taublast/AppoMobi.Maui.DrawnUi.SpaceShooter/assets/25801194/30523e94-12d5-4740-8af3-bebf11ef317f" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>
</div>

### [DrawnUI Demo](https://github.com/taublast/DrawnUi.Maui.Demo)

<div class="video-container-github">
<video controls muted autoplay playsinline>
  <source src="https://github.com/taublast/DrawnUi.Maui.Demo/assets/25801194/092833ea-ef96-4fda-b4e6-3b706cbab79e" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>
</div>


## Final Words

Creating totally drawn NET MAUI apps remains in an experimental state as of today, and it could benefit from a lot more work
to make it a well supported way to develop MAUI apps. At the same time I believe this is a very interesting challenge for all of us.

I would greatly appreciate your feedback, especially on what do you think of this approach and what spots in your apps would be most useful to use drawn controls.
There is a related [thread on Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/dotnetMAUI), where I invite you to post any of your thoughts or questions.
Would you have any specific technical questions about using DrawnUI please feel free to use [Discussions](https://github.com/taublast/DrawnUi.Maui/discussions).

The [DrawnUI for .NET MAUI](https://github.com/taublast/DrawnUi.Maui) repository contains most of the reference links used in this article.  

<style>

.video-container {
  position: relative;
  padding-bottom: 56.25%; /* 16:9 aspect ratio */
  height: 0;
  overflow: hidden;
  max-width: 100%;
  background: #000;
  margin-bottom: 1em;
}

.video-container iframe {
  position: absolute;
  top: 0;
  left: 0;
  width: 100%;
  height: 100%;
}

.video-container-github {
    min-height: 200px;
    background: #000;
    margin-bottom: 1em;
}

.video-container-github video {
  width: 100%;
  height: 100%;
}

</style>

<!-- Place this tag in your head or just before your close body tag. -->
<script async defer src="https://buttons.github.io/buttons.js"></script>

