---
layout: post
title: "Designing PDF layouts in .NET MAUI XAML with DrawnUI"
description: How to create PDF layouts with Hotreload using DrawnUI for .NET MAUI.
date: 2025-09-30 12:00:00 +0000
categories: [MAUI]
tags: [pdf, dotnetmaui]
image: /assets/img/xxx.jpg
---

To be able to create PDF files inside .NET MAUI apps we have may options and libraries available. One of the low-level options is to use [SkiaSharp](https://github.com/mono/SkiaSharp) to draw on the canvas and then export it to PDF. 

When we use SkiaSharp we can use [DrawnUI for .NET MAUI](https://github.com/taublast/DrawnUi.Maui) to make it easier to work with. There are already PDF helpers inside DrawnUI on top of the possibility to intuitively layout drawn controls over a canvas. We can export your drawn layouts, defined in XAML or code-behind to PDF. In fact for drawn layout is doesn't matter where they are drawn into, be it a PDF canvas or an app screen.

This article was born over a recent case i had to create a PDF report for a cross-platform app that measures vehicle dynamics. In modern times we try to go as fastest as possible so i had to find a way to design the report in a shortest time.

I instatly thought about using a standalone window on desktop, this neat MAUI feature,  for previewing the report in approproate size, my case was an A4 landscape, obviously we wouldn't wan't to preview such in mobile app screen proportions.  The goal behind this was to use Hotreload, to fast design the report layout.

As mentionned in previous articles, for faster development i prefer to design cross-platform MAUI apps for Windows platform first, even if app is not intended for Windows, and MAUI standalone window is a perfect fir for this workflow.

The viewmodel responsible for generating and exporting PDF would optionally (while designing) open our pdf report in a separate window, while we design on desktop. We could then adjust code/XAML and see the changes in the running window without manualy recompiling. Isn't it neat!

video in action here

todo how to control scale

images raster

control quality. default is very low, not suitable for images for a4. 85% seems very good ration quality/file size.


<style>

.video-container {
  position: relative;
  padding-bottom: 56.25%; /* 16:9 aspect ratio */
  height: 0;
  overflow: hidden;
  max-width: 100%;
  background: #000;
  margin-bottom: 1em;
}

.video-container iframe {
  position: absolute;
  top: 0;
  left: 0;
  width: 100%;
  height: 100%;
}

.video-container-github {
    min-height: 200px;
    background: #000;
    margin-bottom: 1em;
}

.video-container-github video {
  width: 100%;
  height: 100%;
}

</style>

<!-- Place this tag in your head or just before your close body tag. -->
<script async defer src="https://buttons.github.io/buttons.js"></script>

